Welcome back!
In this chapter we're going
to have a look at the basics
of implementing a
microservice using Quarkus.
First, we're going to have a look at
the features that Quarkus brings
and follow that up by a quiz.
Then we're just going
to immediately jump in
by starting to implement
a microservice using CDI,
JAX-RS for REST endpoints,
and JSON-P for JSON serialization
and deserialization.
Those are all nice profile specifications.
We have an exercise for
that coming up as well.
And then we'll move on to persistence.
So we're going to look at
object relational mapping using
simplified Panache Entities and
have a exercise for that as well.
At the end of the chapter,
we have a end of chapter
review lab as usual,
so a fully blown microservice with Quarkus.
First a bit of history.
As the Java ecosystem matured,
there has been an explosion of various
vendors and server technologies
and developers have a vastly varying
background in Java application development.
A lot of it is Enterprise Java, actually,
because of its business value proposal.
Enterprise Java had
maintained the promise of
abstracting the technicalities
away from the developer,
just like the standard
Java has abstracted away
the tedious details of how to
perform low-level operations
in an operating system.
The Enterprise Java has
abstracted away a lot of
the boilerplate code that the
developers had to write in order to,
for example, open a socket and
connect to a database server.
The MicroProfile specification is
a response by the Eclipse
Foundation and many,
many large vendors, including Red Hat,
that defines a platform that
optimizes Java even further.
So it brings new youth if you
want to the Java platform,
because even though the Enterprise
Java programming environment
and execution environments of course,
had been widely accepted,
the containerization, the rapid
small application deployments,
serverless scaling to 0 and so on.
Then of course, all the challenges that
we discussed in the previous chapter,
so fault tolerance, high
availability, and so on.
They have presented into
Enterprise Java with new challenges.
And the MicroProfile specification
is essentially a platform that adds
optimization for microservices
based architectures
and actually provides portability
across multiple runtimes.
It's not just limited to Enterprise Java.
The intention of the MicroProfile
specifications was to have
loose annotation based
framework to support
many of the common patterns
that we already used,
but may have been complex or
specific to individual environments
and therefore not so widely used.
It's, as such MicroProfile
could have well become a
JSR, Java Standards Request,
but it actually is not meant
to be such a full standard.
These take years to finalize and are very,
very awkward to update
and because microservices
are continuously evolving,
it would've been obsolete probably
before it was even released.
By focusing only on the
high level functionality,
the common grounds found in various
Java microservices applications
the framework had actually
evolved into a very,
very lightweight specification
and pretty much free to
implementations to decide how they were
going to perform certain details.
The initial version of the
MicroProfile specification actually included
only JAX-RS CDI and JSON-P
specifications from Enterprise Java,
which is the absolute
bare minimum that you
need to build a RESTful microservice,
for example, in Java.
And then additional functions were added.
But the most important thing about
the 3 specifications that
were initially included is
that practically any execution
environment from Spring Boot
to any sort of BYO type,
build your own type of RESTful
execution environment had to support
some sort of JAX-RS
implementation and of course JSON-P
serialization and deserialization,
or at least was using a similar framework,
such as CDI. In SpringBoot,
there is no CDI, but there
is dependency injection,
so that's relatively related
so easy to migrate.
MicroProfile essentially relies on
those 3 traditional
Java EE specifications
because they are quite efficient,
they have evolved over
decades of optimization,
but there's also the benefit
of developer familiarity.
And of course, these are widely
used across the Java landscape.
It is also one of the stated goals
of the MicroProfile initiative
to use existing API
specifications where possible,
and just add on top new ones and create
a baseline platform optimized for
developing microservices in the cloud.
One of the first implementations of
the MicroProfile specification was
the Wildfly Swarm or as it was known later
on the Thorntail application server,
which actually was based on
the Wildfly server code
and in turn, Wildfly
server code is actually very,
very much related to JBoss EAP. It is derived
from the same codebase, JBoss EAP
namely. The nice thing about Wildfly
Swarm and Thorntail was that
they were meant to produce
executable JAR files that are
independent of any existing,
pre-existing runtime environment.
They bundle all the application
server components in the Jar file
and they do that only for
those components that are necessary
for the application to run.
So in a sense, they were
quite similar to SpringBoot,
but with the add-on of being able
to rely on well established,
stable Enterprise Java standards wherever
it needed them in the application.
The only objective that the
2 frameworks failed to
achieve were the startup performance,
in order for microservices
orchestration environment, for example,
to be able to scale applications
to 0 and then respond
by quickly scaling up and down
according to the load.
To achieve desired performance,
these implementations would need
a complete rewrite that would
reduce the startup time,
that would reduce the
memory footprint that
the application will cause
in the execution environment.
And actually it was done by
relying on a more extensive
build in compilation process,
which performs various checking
activities that are normally
done during startup or during runtime
even. It performs them
during compilation time,
including configuration, bootstrapping,
reflection preparation.
So any sort of,
let's call it dirty
techniques to be able to
dynamically load code
during runtime would be
performed at compilation time in order to
fully minimize the footprint
of the resulting artifact,
the resulting package.
And Quarkus is actually what emerged as
the collective effort from
the different technologies
that were involved in refactoring
of these existing environments.
A Quarkus focuses on a couple of
key factors in order to provide,
on one hand the best
developer experience possible
but on the other hand, still
keep true to the goals that
are basically produce a minimal
executable that loads fast,
occupies or consumes few resources and
is basically cloud native as such.
So first, Quarkus aims to be cloud-native,
so that means the main deployment
platform would be a container.
To enable container
first development, Quarkus
actually focuses on a
couple of properties.
That is, Function as a Service requires
Fast startups and Quarkus aims
for startups under 1 second,
regardless of what kind of
an application you've built,
it should start a really, really fast.
It should have a small memory footprint.
And by removing all the
unnecessary classes at runtime,
because we scan for them during
compilation, during build time,
Quarkus actually achieves a much,
much smaller package size
and therefore of course also a
much smaller memory footprint.
And of course that also brings
us to disk utilization.
It is not an inconsequential parameter,
the size of the container
image that you want to,
that you are trying to deploy.
Because the larger the image,
the longer it takes for the node to
download the image from a registry,
which means it's not just about disk
utilization, it's also about the time
that it takes for you to start up the
container for the very first time
or another necessity that had to be
implemented or had to be pursued
in Quarkus was the unification of imperative
and reactive programming models
at the same time. Java
developers
can use the imperative programming
model that they already know,
but at the same time,
they can take advantage of some
paradigms such as event-driven,
asynchronous and of course,
reactive models as such.
They co-exist in the same framework,
so developers can always choose
the best approach
for their problem at hand.
As a platform, Quarkus is
extremely developer centric,
so it brings together several technologies
under a unified framework and attempts
to make them work seamlessly.
So it means that a couple of changes
as opposed to what your normal assembly
model would look like have been done.
For example, the configuration of
all the technologies that
are used in the application
is placed into the same configuration file
or can be placed into the
same configuration file,
at least if you wanted to.
Of course, you're not limited to that, but
it can be as simple as that.
In developer mode, which is
a special mode that we're going
to use a lot in this course,
instant live reloading
of any changes made to
the source code is possible
in the runtime.
So if you start Quarkus in
dev mode and you change,
let's say REST endpoints behavior,
the moment the Quarkus container
receives a new request,
it will reload itself
and of course, the new functionality
will be immediately available.
Opinionated seems to be
a very popular word
but it essentially means simply that
the framework tries to use default,
which make sense over the largest
possible set of use cases, right?
So you have to configure only
the things that you care about
because you can more or
less rely on the fact that
the framework will work
correctly with defaults.
And most importantly,
there are native builds
for all included libraries that
are integrated into Quarkus.
The MicroProfile add-ons to Quarkus
make it really easy to transition from
old school traditional Java EE
development environments
to a microservices development type.
Because developers can use
all the standards and
frameworks that they're used
to using in Enterprise Java
but now with the focus on simply
developing the functional
requirements of the application,
any additional microservices
related functionalities can be added
on top of that using a simple
annotation driven approach,
and even to a degree using
configuration settings in the
single configuration file.
Since one of the main
drivers in Quarkus design and
development was to provide
a platform which would
enable all sorts of workloads from
traditional to cloud-based, to Serverless,
to Function as a Service,
it was extremely important to pursue
the low memory usage and fast
startup time objectives.
They are very, very
important in such scenarios.
Now, even though Quarkus
in Java execution mode,
so using a traditional JVM,
which is the default mode,
is actually incredible.
It's a big improvement over the
traditional execution environments.
1 second startup times might
still be unacceptable.
You might need something
a lot faster than that.
And to this end, Quarkus has support for
GraalVM's ahead-of-time compilation.
GraalVM is a special polyglot
JVM from Oracle which offers
ahead-of-time compilation to
executable Java applications
among other features.
But it uses a number of
assumptions that require
the Java virtual machine to know at
compilation time which classes
the application is going to use.
This sounds very similar to what Quarkus
had already been doing
in its own way, right?
But not at the low level of
the Java virtual machine.
So this closed world
assumption, as it's called,
that is made by
GraalVM, that is required for
ahead-of-time compilation
is actually one of
the foundation blocks that allow also for
native compilation and the building of
native executables from Java source code.
This is never before happened
in this particular way.
There's always been Java to
native compilation option.
But it was very complex, low-level.
It required the knowledge of C
and C++ development.
It required a lot of debugging and
essentially didn't really pick,
didn't really take off
because it was simply too complex.
GraalVM plus Quarkus actually achieve
that because Quarkus provides
its own library implementations for much
of the frameworks that it supports.
So essentially, as we discussed
a couple of minutes before,
Quarkus was a complete redesign,
rebuild of certain standards from
the Wildfly and Thorn tailed codebase
and others of course as well.
The rebuilds, the refactoring
process had focused on
providing classes that are as clean as
possible and offers much insight into
the potential code execution paths
at compilation time as possible.
This actually is an ideal
match for GraalVMs AoT,
because at compilation time GraalVM
has actually not a difficult task,
to see, which classes will be needed,
removes all the unneeded classes from
the application and of course from
the dependent libraries as well.
And this match is actually perfect
combination for Cloud deployments.
The Quarkus, compared to other Java-
based cloud-native frameworks,
offers a number of benefits.
Faster response times in
general, lower memory usage,
higher throughput in reactive routes,
and full container image support.
On top of that, it is compliant with
MicroProfile confirmance tests
and it's really, really easy
as we're about to see
to use for programming.
Especially if you're already used to
existing Java EE standards used in
microservices and web service applications.
Let's have a look at the
quiz and then join us in
the next video, where we start by developing
our very first Quarkus application.